Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we’ll take a look at the fundamentals
of wireless networks.
The exam topics we will cover are 1.1.d, access
points, 1.11.a, nonoverlapping wi-fi channels,
1.11.b, SSID, and 1.11.c, RF.
We will cover these and other wireless exam
topics in greater depth in future videos,
but this video will be a general overview
and introduction to wireless networks.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
I’ll introduce radio frequency, RF.
RF is a range of electromagnetic wave frequencies
which have been assigned for various purposes,
including AM and FM radio, microwaves, radar,
and Wi-Fi.
The last one is of most interest to us, of
course, because wireless LANs use Wi-Fi.
I’ll talk about Wi-Fi standards as defined
in IEEE 802.11.
Just like various Ethernet standards are defined
in IEEE 802.3, various wireless LAN standards
are defined in IEEE 802.11.
We’ll look at some fundamentals of wireless
LANs and how they differ from wired LANs.
We’re going to cover a lot of new concepts
in this video, so I highly recommend taking
notes as you watch.
When learning new concepts taking notes is
important to help you keep the new information
organized without feeling overwhelmed.
Make sure to watch until the end of the video
for a bonus practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA, my recommended practice exams
for the CCNA.
First let me introduce wireless networks,
specifically wireless LANs.
Although we will briefly look at other types
of wireless networks, in this section of the
course we will be focusing on wireless LANs
using Wi-Fi, because that’s what you need
to know for the CCNA.
The standards we use for wireless LANs are
defined in IEEE 802.11, just like how wired
Ethernet LANs are defined in IEEE 802.3.
Note that the term Wi-Fi is a trademark of
the Wi-Fi alliance, which is not directly
connected to the IEEE.
The Wi-Fi Alliance tests and certifies equipment
for 802.11 standards compliance and interoperability
with other devices.
Devices which have been Wi-Fi certified can
use the Wi-Fi certified mark like this.
For example, this is a photo of the back side
of one of the Cisco wireless access points
that I will be using to make these videos.
As you can see, it has been certified by the
Wi-Fi alliance.
So, although the Wi-Fi alliance certifies
devices for compliance with the 802.11 standards,
Wi-Fi isn’t technically the correct term
to refer to 802.11 wireless LANs.
However, Wi-Fi has become the common term
that people use to refer to 802.11 wireless
LANs and I will use both terms throughout
these videos.
Wireless networks have some issues that we
need to deal with.
First of all, all devices within range receive
all frames, like devices connected to an Ethernet
hub.
When using an Ethernet switch, the switch
is able to forward frames only to the intended
recipient.
In addition, switches allow devices to function
using full-duplex, so devices can both send
and receive frames at the same time and collisions
shouldn’t occur unless there is some problem
in the network.
However when using an ethernet hub, the hub
will always flood all frames it receives,
and collisions can occur when multiple devices
try to send and receive traffic at the same
time.
Like devices connected to an Ethernet hub,
when a wireless device transmits a frame all
wireless-enabled devices within range will
be able to pick up that frame.
The signal isn’t contained within a physical
wire, because the signal consists of electromagnetic
waves radiating out from the transmitting
device.
This can lead to data privacy concerns, as
well as collisions when devices communicate
on the same channel at the same time.
So, because all devices within range receive
the frames, privacy of data within the LAN
is a greater concern.
In wired networks we don’t usually encrypt
data within the LAN, only when sending data
over a shared network such as the Internet.
However, for wireless networks it is very
important to encrypt data even within the
LAN, or else anyone with a device in range
of the transmitter can access that data.
Also, to avoid collisions and facilitate half-duplex
communications, CSMA/CA, carrier sense multiple
access with collision avoidance, is used.
That’s similar to another term I mentioned
earlier in the course.
CSMA/CD is used in wired networks to detect
and recover from collisions.
CSMA/CA is used in wireless networks to avoid
collisions before they occur.
Basically, when using CSMA/CA a device will
wait for other devices to stop transmitting
before it transmits data itself.
Let’s look at a simple flowchart of the
process.
The transmitting device assembles the frame,
prepares it to be sent.
Then it listens to check if the channel is
free.
If the channel is not free, it will wait for
a random period of time.
Then it will listen again.
If the channel is free this time, it will
transmit the frame.
Note that this is a simplification of the
process, and there is an optional feature
in which the transmitting device sends a ‘request
to send’, RTS, packet and waits for a ‘clear
to send’, CTS, packet from the receiver
before actually sending the data packet.
But this is just extra information, not something
you need to know for the CCNA.
But make sure you know the term CSMA/CA and
that it is used in wireless LANs to avoid
collisions.
Another issue that we must deal with is that
wireless communications are regulated by various
international and national bodies.
You aren’t allowed to transmit data on any
channel you want, and which channels you are
allowed to use can vary depending on the country.
Fortunately, the 802.11 standard outlines
which frequencies can be used for wireless
LANs, and devices are designed to use those
frequencies.
We also must consider the wireless signal
coverage area.
In wired connections we do have to consider
the cable length and in some cases electromagnetic
interference, but with wireless connections
there are other factors we must consider.
First of all, the signal range, how far the
signal can actually travel.
And there are several factors that effect
how far a signal can travel intact.
Absorption, reflection, refraction, diffraction,
and scattering.
Let’s briefly look at each of them.
Absorption happens when a wireless signal
passes through a material and is converted
into heat, weakening the original signal.
Here’s an example.
By the way, I took this screenshot from EMANIM,
which can be used to animate electromagnetic
waves.
Check out the link I put below the image to
use EMANIM, it’s free.
So, a wireless access point sends a signal,
but the receiving laptop is on the other side
of a wall.
The wall absorbs some of the signal, resulting
in a weaker signal by the time it reaches
the laptop.
That’s absorption.
Reflection happens when a signal bounces off
of a material, for example metal.
This is why Wi-Fi reception is usually poor
in elevators, because the signal bounces off
the metal and very little penetrates into
the elevator.
For example if there is a metal wall between
an AP and a laptop, most likely the laptop
will not receive a good signal from the AP
because much of the signal will bounce off
of the wall.
Refraction happens when a wave is bent when
entering a medium where the signal travels
at a different speed.
For example, glass and water can refract waves.
Try putting a straw into a clear glass of
water.
It will appear as if the straw is bent.
That’s because the light waves travel at
a different speed in water than in air.
That’s refraction.
Diffraction happens when a wave encounters
an obstacle and travels around it.
This can result in blind spots behind the
obstacle.
For example, this PC is blocked by some object,
and the signals from the wireless access point
travel around the object to some degree, but
the PC is in a blind spot and doesn’t receive
sufficient signal from the access point.
That’s diffraction.
Scattering happens when a material causes
a signal to scatter in all directions.
Dust, smog, uneven surfaces, etc can cause
scattering.
Forgive the unprofessional diagram again,
but when a signal from this wireless access
point strikes this uneven surface, the signal
is scattered in all directions.
That’s scattering.
All of those, absorption, reflection, refraction,
diffraction, and scattering, can affect the
quality of a wireless signal.
When planning the positioning of wireless
access points for a network, you have to take
all of these into account.
One more issue I want to mention is interference.
Other devices using the same channels can
cause interference.
For example, a wireless LAN in your neighbor’s
house or apartment.
So, I think you can see that there are various
things we have to take into concern when building
a wireless network that we don’t have to
think about with wired networks.
Now let’s talk about radio frequency, and
electromagnetic waves in general.
To send wireless signals, the sender applies
an alternating current to an antenna.
This creates electromagnetic fields which
propagate out as waves.
Electromagnetic waves can be measured in multiple
ways, for example amplitude and frequency.
Amplitude is the maximum strength of the electric
and magnetic fields.
For example, look at these two waves.
The red one has a higher amplitude, and the
blue one has a lower amplitude.
Although these two waves have different amplitudes,
they have the same frequency, which is the
next term we’ll look at.
Frequency measures the number of up/down cycles
per a given unit of time.
the most common measurement of frequency is
hertz.
Hertz is simply the number of cycles per second.
Then of course there are kilohertz, thousands
of cycles per second.
Megahertz, millions of cycles per second.
Gigahertz, billions of cycles per second.
And terahertz, trillions of cycles per second.
Of course there are more, but these are the
common ones.
Look at these two waves.
Although they both have the same amplitude
this time, the red one has a higher frequency
and the blue one has a lower frequency.
The red one goes through more cycles per second
than the blue one.
Look at this wave.
Let’s say this represents one second.
What is the frequency of this wave?
Well, this is one cycle.
This is a second cycle.
A third cycle.
And a fourth cycle.
So, this is 4 cycles per second, 4 hertz.
By the way, another important term is period,
the amount of time of one cycle.
So, if the frequency is 4 Hz, the period is
0.25 seconds, one quarter of one second, because
4 cycles occur in one second.
The visible frequency range is from about
400 THz to 790 THz.
But the range we’re concerned with, radio
frequency, is from about 30 Hz to 300 GHz,
and it’s used for many purposes.
Actually we’re only concerned with a couple
small bands of this range.
Thanks to Wikipedia for this chart of the
radio frequency spectrum.
The text is a bit small so it might be hard
to read, but that’s okay.
I just want to point out the two ranges used
for wireless LANs.
IEEE 802.11 wireless LANs use a few sections
of the ‘ultra high frequency’ and ‘super
high frequency’ ranges.
Wi-Fi uses two main bands, meaning frequency
ranges.
First is called the 2.4 GHz band.
The name is 2.4 GHz, but the actual range
is from 2.4 GHz to 2.4835 GHz.
Then there is the 5 GHz band.
This time the actual range is from 5.150 GHz
to 5.825 GHz.
But it’s further divided into four smaller
bands.
Note that you don’t have to memorize any
of these band ranges, just remember the two
main ones.
2.4 GHz and 5 GHz.
If you want to become a wireless network expert
you might want to remember the exact ranges
and bands, but for the CCNA that’s not necessary.
The 2.4 GHz band typically provides further
reach in open space and better penetration
of obstacles such as walls.
However, more devices tend to use the 2.4
GHz band so interference can be a bigger problem
compared to the 5 GHz band.
Modern devices typically support both, and
it’s up to you which you want to use.
Note that Wi-Fi 6, which is IEEE standard
802.11ax, has expanded the spectrum range
to include a band in the 6 GHz range.
I’m not sure if you’ll be asked about
the 6 GHz range in the CCNA exam, but I’m
mentioning it just in case.
Now, each band is divided up into multiple
channels, and devices are configured to transmit
and receive traffic on one or more of these
channels.
I say ‘or more’ because something called
‘channel bonding’ can be used to combine
channels together, but I don’t think you
need to know that for the CCNA.
For example, the 2.4 GHz band is divided into
several channels, each with a 22 MHz range.
Here are the channels, and note that it differs
by country.
Thanks to wikipedia for the chart again, by
the way.
Note that the ‘11b only’ here for channel
14 in Japan refers to 802.11b, which is an
old and slow standard not used much any more.
Now, an important aspect of these channels
is that they overlap.
For example, channel 1 is from 2401 MHz to
2423 MHz, which has some overlap with channels
2, 3, 4, and 5.
To avoid interference between adjacent wireless
access points, we have to carefully choose
which channels we configure our access points
to use.
In a small wireless LAN with only a single
access point, you can use any channel, because
there are no other access points that can
cause interference.
However, in larger wireless LANs with multiple
APs, it’s important that adjacent APs don’t
use overlapping channels.
This helps avoid interference between devices
transmitting on the same channel.
If overlapping channels are used, it will
result in reduced performance and a worse
user experience.
In the 2.4 GHz band, it is recommended to
use three channels, 1, 6, and 11.
Here is a diagram of the channels in the 2.4
GHz band.
Notice that channels 1, 6, and 11 don’t
overlap with each other.
So, we can have an AP using channel 1, an
AP using channel 6, and an AP using channel
11 and they won’t interfere with each other.
Note that outside of north america you can
use other combinations, but for the CCNA you
should really remember the 1, 6, and 11 combination.
And as for the 5 GHz band, it consists of
non-overlapping channels, so it is much easier
to avoid interference between adjacent wireless
access points.
Using those three channels in the 2.4 GHz
band, you can place APs in a ‘honeycomb’
pattern to provide complete coverage of an
area without interference between channels.
The diagram on the left shows how you can
do that with channels 1, 6, and 11, as well
as other patterns for those outside of north
america.
Here’s a large version of the 1-6-11 honeycomb
pattern.
Note that the coverage area of each AP overlaps
to provide complete coverage of the area,
but the frequencies don’t overlap, which
helps avoid interference between the access
points.
When you have to provide wireless coverage
over a large space, you should arrange your
access points like this.
Just like there have been various 802.3 Ethernet
standards, there are plenty of 802.11 Wi-Fi
standards too that use different frequencies
and provide different data rates.
Starting with the original 802.11 which was
released in 1997 all the way to 802.11ax,
also known as Wi-Fi 6, which was released
in 2019, here are the 802.11 standards you
should know.
I know it’s a lot of work, but I do recommend
memorizing these standard names, the frequencies
they use, and their maximum theoretical data
rates for the test.
Note that these maximum data rates are theoretical.
For many reasons you’re probably going to
get much lower data rates than the theoretical
maximums.
Also notice that 802.11n is known as Wi-Fi
4, ac is known as Wi-Fi 5, and ax is known
as Wi-Fi 6, however there is no official Wi-Fi
1, 2, or 3.
That’s all I have to say about this.
Take some time to memorize these different
standards and their characteristics.
Of course, I recommend using the flashcards
to help you do that.
By the way, 802.11-enabled devices might support
one of these standards, some of them, or all
of them.
So, I recommend checking which standards are
supported before you buy a device.
Also, for some homework try looking up the
WiFi standards supported by the wireless devices
you own.
For example, if you have an iPhone you can
check Apple’s website to see which standards
it supports.
Here’s an example for the iPhone 10.
It supports 802.11 A, B, G, N, and AC.
Finally let’s look at another important
part of 802.11, service sets.
802.11 defines different kinds of service
sets which are groups of wireless network
devices.
There are three main types, independent service
sets, infrastructure service sets, and mesh
service sets.
All devices in a service set share the same
SSID, service set ID.
You might have heard that term before.
The SSID is a human-readable name which identifies
the service set.
And it does not have to be unique, although
it’s best to configure unique SSIDs since
that’s what you’ll be looking at when
you select which network to connect to.
Here are the SSIDs my phone can detect as
I sit here at my desk.
Now, I said SSIDs are human-readable, meaning
they can be given easy-to-read names like
‘Jeremy’s Wi-Fi’ or something like that.
In this case, these names aren’t exactly
the most easily readable.
However, I could easily change the SSID of
my wireless LAN to something simpler.
Anyway, let’s look at the different types
of service sets.
First, an IBSS, independent basic service
set, is a wireless network in which two or
more wireless devices connect directly without
using an AP, access point.
These are also called ad hoc networks.
They be used, for example, for file transfer
such as when using Apple’s airdrop.
However they are not scalable beyond a few
devices and are typically only used for limited
purposes such as quick file transfers like
airdrop.
Next, a BSS, basic service set, is a kind
of infrastructure service set in which clients
connect to each other via an AP, access point,
but not directly to each other.
Remember I said there are three kinds of service
sets?
First is independent, which I just showed
you, and second is infrastructure.
BSS is a kind of infrastructure service set.
The AP serves as network infrastructure connecting
different wireless clients together.
A BSSID, basic service set ID, is used to
uniquely identify the AP.
Other APs can use the same SSID, which is
Jeremy’s Wi-Fi in this case, but not the
same BSSID.
The BSSID is the MAC address of the AP’s
radio, and as you know MAC addresses are unique.
To be part of the BSS, wireless devices request
to associate with the BSS.
Wireless devices that have associated with
the BSS are called clients or stations.
Another important term is BSA, basic service
area.
This is the area around the AP where it’s
signal is usable.
What’s different between a BSS and a BSA?
Well, a BSS is a group of devices which are
wirelessly connected via an AP.
BSA just refers to the physical area around
the AP where devices will be able to associate
with the AP and join its BSS.
So, BSS is a group of devices, and BSA is
a physical area.
And note that clients must communicate via
the AP, not directly with each other.
The traffic must flow through the AP before
going to the other client, even if the other
client is in range of the sender’s signal.
To create larger wireless LANs beyond the
range of a single AP, we use an ESS, extended
service set.
This is the second kind of infrastructure
Note how there are two BSSs, BSS1 and BSS2,
but together they form an ESS.
APs with their own BSSs are connected by a
wired network.
Notice how the APs for BSS1 and BSS2 are connected
by a switch.
Each BSS uses the same SSID, Jeremy’s Wi-Fi
in this case.
However each BSS has a unique BSSID, notice
how they are different in the diagram.
Also, each BSS uses a different channel to
avoid interference.
Notice that BSS1 is using 2.4 GHz channel
1, and BSS2 is using channel 6.
Clients can pass between APs without having
to reconnect, providing a seamless Wi-Fi experience
when moving between APs.
This is called roaming, when you move between
two APs in an extended service set.
Note that there should be some overlap in
the BSAs, about 10 to 15 percent, or else
the connectivity can be lost when moving between
APs.
The final kind of service set we’ll look
at is an MBSS, Mesh Basic Service Set.
An MBSS can be used in situations where it’s
difficult to run an Ethernet connection to
every AP.
The mesh APs use two radios.
One to provide a BSS to wireless clients so
they can connect to the network, and one radio
to form the mesh network between the APs,
to form a backhaul network which bridges traffic
from AP to AP.
For example if this PC wants to send traffic
to the Internet, it sends traffic to its nearest
AP, which then bridges the traffic from AP
to AP over the backhaul network back to the
switch.
At least one switch is connected to the wired
network, and it’s called the RAP, root access
point.
This is the RAP in this network.
The other APs are called MAPs, Mesh Access
Points.
A protocol is used to determine the past path
that traffic should take through the mesh,
similar to how dynamic routing protocols are
used to determine the best path to a destination.
Now, most wireless networks aren’t standalone
networks.
Rather, they are a way for wireless clients
to connect to the wired network infrastructure,
and the AP serves to translate between the
two mediums.
In 802.11, the upstream wired network is called
the DS, distribution system.
Each wireless BSS or ESS is mapped to a VLAN
in the wired network.
Here’s an example.
The SSID Jeremy’s Wi-Fi is translated to
VLAN 10 on the wired network, which is the
distribution system.
The wired hosts in VLAN 10 will be able to
communicate with the wireless hosts in Jeremy’s
Wi-Fi.
And it’s possible for an AP to provide multiple
wireless LANs, each with a unique SSID.
This is the same as how a switch can divide
a single physical wired network into multiple
VLANs.
Each wireless LAN is mapped to a separate
VLAN and connected to the network via a trunk.
Here’s an example.
There are two wireless LANs with their own
SSIDs, Jeremy’s Wi-Fi and Guest Wi-Fi.
Although as I said before, SSIDs don’t have
to be unique, but usually they are.
Jeremy’s Wi-Fi is mapped to VLAN 10, and
Guest Wi-Fi is mapped to VLAN 11, and the
AP is connected to the switch via a trunk
which allows both VLAN 10 and 11.
Also, notice that each wireless LAN uses a
unique BSSID, usually by incrementing the
last digit of the BSSID by one.
So, the BSSID of Jeremy’s Wi-Fi ends with
3456, and the BSSID of guest Wi-Fi ends with
3457.
The final thing we’ll cover is a few more
modes that APs can operate in.
First, an AP in repeater mode can be used
to extend the range of a BSS.
Here’s an example.
The repeater will simply retransmit any signal
it receives from the AP, which will extend
the range of the AP’s BSS.
A repeater with a single radio must operate
on the same channel as the AP, but this can
drastically reduce the overall throughput
on the channel, since the repeater will be
repeating the AP’s signals back to it using
the same channel, keeping the channel busy.
This cuts the effective throughput of the
channel by 50%.
A repeater with two radios fixes this weakness,
because it can receive on one channel and
then retransmit on another channel.
So, that’s how a wireless repeater works.
Next, an AP operating as a workgroup bridge
operates as a wireless client of another AP,
and can be used to connect wired devices to
the wireless network.
In the example below, PC1 does not have wireless
capabilities and also does not have access
to a wired connection to SW1.
However, PC1 has a wired connection to the
workgroup bridge, which has a wireless connection
to the AP.
Now, there are two kinds of WGBs.
Universal WGB, uWGB, is an 802.11 standard
that allows one device to be bridged to the
wireless network.
However what Cisco simply calls WGB is their
proprietary version which allows multiple
wired clients to be bridged to the wireless
network.
To summarize, this is a solution which allows
clients that don’t support wireless connections
to connect to the wireless network via an
AP operating as a workgroup bridge.
The final mode I’m going to introduce is
outdoor bridge.
An outdoor bridge can be used to connect networks
over long distances without a physical cable
connecting them.
The APs will use specialized antennas that
focus most of the signal power in one direction,
which allows the wireless connection to be
made over longer distances than normally possible.
The connection can be point-to-point as in
the diagram, just two sites being connected.
Or it can be point-to-multipoint, in which
multiple sites all connect to one central
site, forming a hub-and-spoke topology.
Okay, since we covered so many different topics
in this video let me summarize all of them
with a lovely wall of text.
Here it is.
Now, although this summarizes the topics in
this video, make sure you know the details
of each topic that we covered.
If you didn’t take notes I recommend going
back in the video to take your own notes,
and also using the flashcards to memorize
some of the details.
Okay, in this video we covered the basics
of wireless networks, specifically wireless
LANs, including radio frequency, wi-fi standards,
and wireless LAN fundamentals such as service
sets.
There is still a lot more to cover about wireless
networks including wireless network architectures,
wireless network security, and wireless network
configuration.
Those topics will be in the next few videos.
As always, watch until the end of the quiz
for a bonus practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA, the best practice exams for
the CCNA.
Okay, now let’s go to quiz question 1.
When using the 2.4 GHz band, which channels
should be selected when using multiple APs?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, 1, 6, and 11.
As this diagram shows, channels 1, 6, and
11 do not overlap, so even if APs are near
each other interference can be avoided.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
If an enterprise’s network is mostly wired,
what is the purpose of an AP in the network?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is to connect wireless devices
to the wired network.
In 802.11, the wired network is called the
DS, distribution system, and the AP’s main
role is to connect wireless devices to the
wired network.
Okay let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following bands are commonly
used by wireless LANs?
(select two).
Pause the video now to select the best answers.
Okay, the answers are A, 2.4 GHz, and D, 5
GHz.
These bands are divided into channels which
are used by wireless devices to send and receive
wireless signals.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which of the following statements about an
ESS are true? (select two).
Pause the video now to select the best answers.
Okay, the answers are B, each BSS uses a unique
BSSID and C, roaming can provide seamless
connectivity when moving between APs.
A is not correct because each BSS in an ESS
should use the same SSID, and D is not correct
because adjacent APs should use nonoverlapping
channels to avoid interference.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following statements is not true
about an AP that provides multiple BSSs?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, each BSS shares the
same BSSID.
Although it is possible for each BSS to share
the same SSID, they must have unique BSSIDs.
With that said, however, it is best practice
to also use a unique SSID for each BSS.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s try a bonus practice question
in Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.